Introduction to Computational Fluid 

Introduction
and

Mathematical


Computational fluid dynamics, (abbreviated CFD) studies problems of fluid
dynamics using numerical methods on a computer. Although the subject fluid
dynamics is about three centuries old, CED is a relatively new subject. It is
hardly four decades old, Remarkable success has been achieved in CFD during this,
time, particularly, in handling nonlinear problems and problems involving complex
geometries, Computational methods developed in CFD are being increasingly
applied to other branches of science and engineering. The problems of study in
CED are often formulated in terms of a partial differential equation or in terms of
a system of such equations, together with boundary and/or initial conditions. ‘This
chapter recapitulates the basic concepts of partial differential equations which are
useful in the subsequent chapters.
1.1 INTRODUCTION
Computational fluid dynamics is an extension of classical fluid dynamics,
originating from the amalgamation of classical fluid dynamics and numerical
analysis supported by powerful electronic digital computers. ‘Thousands of research
‘workers, mathematicians, physicists and engineers all over the world contributed
towards its growth and development and the progress is remarkable. It has created
an atmosphere of confidence, even to the extent that almost no problem of fluid
dynamics is now considered unsolvable. The zeal that has been generated in the
‘minds of research workers and students of fluid dynamics is unparallel.
“The year 1755 was a decisive year in the development of classical fluid dynamies 21
‘when Leonhard Euler established the momentum-flux conservation equations for
an inviscid fluid, now known as Euler's equations, ‘The Navier-Stokes equations
fora viscous fluid were developed in 1840. Through the development of boundary 598
layer concept of Prandil (1904), it became possible to unite inviscid and viscous flow
studies and obtain satisfactory explanation of a karge number of flow phenomena.
Approximate methods were employed and the results obtained were found to
be qualitatively correct and often showed excellent agreement with experimental A
results, Frequently, expansion procedures in terms of certain small parameters were
used to simplify the governing equations, which were then solved approximately.
No general procedures for solving nonlinear problems were available, and in the
language of von Karman (1941) “engineer grapples with nonlinear problems”. The v
scene totally changed through the advent of electronic digital computers: when
powerful numerical methods like finite difference, finite element and their variants,
‘were developed which could deal with nonlinear problems effectively
CED, is a subject developed recently, almost simultaneously with electronic Q
digital computers. Foundations of finite difference method for partial differential
Q

Introduction and Mathematical Preliminaries s
equations was laid by Courant et al. (1928) in a celebrated paper for studying
existence and uniqueness of solutions of partial differential equations. Although,
clearly works on CFD may be traced back to Richardson (1910) and Emmons (1944),
the systematic study of CFD started in the sixties. During the past 35 years, CFD
made spectacular progress, and several powerful computational methods have come
up during this period, the most prominent among them being the finite difference
method, the finite element method, the finite volume method and the spectral
method. ‘These methods depend heavily on the use of powerful electronic digital
computers
‘The basic equations of inviscid fluid dynamics are the Euler equations, which
constitute a system of first-order nonlinear partial differential equations. Along,
with a particular problem of fluid dynamics, certain initial and boundary conditions
are associated, which are also often nonlinear. For more than two centuries,
mathematicians and engineers introduced various kinds of approximations leading
to linearization of the basic equations, Often, the boundary conditions were also
linearized in order to make the problems tractable. Even for such linearized
problems, recourse to further approximation had to be taken while solving the
linearized problems because most frequently no exact analytical method might be
available,
‘A primary difference between CFD methods and the approximate methods
of classical fluid dynamics may be noted. Once a model has been chosen, the
model equations and boundary and/or initial conditions are solved in CFD by
numerically exact methods, without introducing any further approximation. The
only kind of error introduced are the numerical errors for which often numerical 22
errorestimates or some kind of error bounds are available, By sufficient refinement
‘of the mesh system, the computed solutions are expected to approach the exact
solution, This is not true about the above-mentioned approximate methods which 598
introduce approximations to the model equations and boundary conditions which
are then solved by approximate methods,
During the fifties and sixties various computational methods were developed,
as already mentioned, which aided by an electronic digital computer could A
successfully reat nonlinear problems, All these methods discretize the problem so
that a Solvable system of algebraic equations are obtained, the number of equations
being equal to the number of discrete points in the domain, ‘The resulting algebraic
system is linear if the original problem is linear, otherwise a system of nonlinear v
equations is obtained, which is then solved by a standard numerical method on a
digital computer.
‘A computer plays a vital role in view of the huge number of arithmetic operations
involved in a typical fluid flow problem and our desire is to solve such systems in 

6 Introduction to Computational Fluid Dynamics
a reasonable amount of time, To form an idea of the amount of labour involved,
‘we consider in the following, a simple problem involving two-dimensional Laplace
equation.
Consider the two-dimensional Laplace equation &
 ay
in the unit square OABC in the first quadrant with Dirichlet boundary condition,
by finite difference method as shown in Fig. 1.1. The domain OABC is
subdivided into a network by drawing straight lines x= jAx, y= kAy,
jal2....MM+1, k=1,2...,N,N41, parallel to the coordinate
axes. The points of intersection of these lines are known as mesh points
The partial derivatives <5 and “are then approximately replaced by partial
difference quotients at each mesh point. For example, we may write approximately Q

In fact, assuming u(x, y) to be sufficiently smooth (that is, sufficient number of
times continuously differentiable in the considered domain), itis possible to write,
using Taylor's expansion about the point (x, y)

where &, & are points in the intervals (x, x + Ax)and in (x — Ax, x) respectively.
In view of the smoothness of u(x, y), the derivatives of « are bounded, and the term
in the square bracket on the right side of Eg, , known as the truncation error 24
term, may be rewritten as O(Ax?), representing a quantity of the order of Ax? this
means that it a quantity which when divided by Ax?, tends to a finite nonzero
limit as Ax —> 0, In finite difference notation, it is customary to write

“This is central difference representation for the second derivative, Since the values, v
‘of w at three abscissa points j +1, j, j — | are involved, itis called three-point
central difference formula, Similarly, itis possible to express  Eqs. and be replaced by the corresponding first
terms on the right, a truncation errors committed which is of the second order, that
is, proportional to the square of the mesh lengths Ax or Ay. Itis called truncation Q

error because it arises through the truncation of an infinitesimal or limiting process
by a finite one
Substituting Eqs. and in Eq, and neglecting the truncation error
terms for the present, the following linear algebraic equation is obtained for the
‘mesh point (j, &)

‘n-unknowns.It is not difficult to prove that the coefficient determinant of the system
of equations does not vanish,
Now, suppose we wish to obtain results correct to three-decimal places and wish
to know, what should be the mesh sizes Ax, Ay so that this could be achieved
For the sake of simplicity, assume Ax = Ay; then we should have the neglected 25
truncation error
 number of mesh points, Noting
that one of the most economical elimination methods for solving linear systems
requites approximately “number of multiplications and divisions it follows that
for solving the system of Eg,  the number of multiplication and division needed “a
is at least
which is a huge number, essentially requiring evaluation with the help of a powerful
digital computer. These days in CFD, itis common to demand accuracy greater than
thee decimal places and often six-decimal place accuracy is required for many
design problems and applications. This would mean significantly greater number Q
of operations requiring more powerful computers, in order that we may be able 10
solve a typical CFD problem in @ reasonable amount of time.

Introduction and Mathematical Preliminaries °
1.2 TYPICAL PARTIAL DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
IN FLUID DYNAMICS
“The principles of conservation of mass, momentum and energy flux constitute the
basic principles of fluid flow and deliver the requisite number of partial differential
equations. If the fluid is assumed to be inviscid, then Euler equations are the
governing equations. In vector notation, assuming no external body forces, heat
‘or energy supply, the Euler equations are (Landau and Lifshitz, 1989; Oswatitsch
1956; Niyogi, 1977)
where R isa universal constant, Tis the absolute temparature and m is the molar a
mass of the fluid medium, At normal temperature and pressure
R = 1.986 cal/e°C = 8.31 Joule/g°C,
For oxygen m = 32, for nitrogen m = 28 and for air m = 29.0. v
‘At very high speeds (hypersonic flow), the temperature can become very high
and dissociation and ionization take place. In such cases also, one can work with an
equation of the form , although with a smaller value of m. Equations
, together with Eg. 0.13) or Eg constitute the governing equations for Q

 Introduction to Computational Fluid Dynamics
inviscid fluid flow. In three dimensions, these constitute a system of five first-order
‘nonlinear partial differential equations and one thermodynamic relation for the six
unknowns, namely, the three velocity components (for Cartesian coordinates these
are usually denoted by, vand.), the pressure p, density p and the specific entropy
s.Foraspecific uid flow problem, appropriate initial and boundary conditions must
be prescribed. For example, at solid body, itis required that the normal velocity
‘must vanish relative to the body,
ALa boundary between two immiscible fluids the pressure and the velocity
component normal to the surface of separation must be the same for the two fluids.
Moreover, each of these velocity components must be equal to the corresponding
component of the velocity of the surface.
‘A detailed discussion on the basic equations of fluid dynamics, together with
different kinds of boundary and/or initial conditions may be found in Chapter 7
If further, the Nuid is assumed to be incompressible then the density p is constant
throughout the fluid, The Euler equations may then be simplified to
V-G=0, continuity,
88 gm} =—Avp, momentum Mm
art G-VM=—FVP, momentum tux. 6
“The equations are particularly simple for ‘rotational flow for which
everywhere in the flow field, A velocity potential g exists then, such that
G=Vo 27
and the continuity equation reduces to
vp =0, (19)
y? 598
where V? denotes the Laplacian operator
For steady inviscid isentropic irrotational flow the governing equation is the
gas dynamic equation (see Chapter 7)
vio=tve ¥(50°) (120) a
‘where the local sound speed cis given by the Bernoulli equation
P+ ag +d, (any v
y-l y-1
suffix 90 denoting free-stream condition, y being the ratio of the specific heats
y= Cp/Cy Q


1.3. TYPES OF SECOND-ORDER EQUATIONS
‘We consider partial differential equations of the form: 598

‘At point P(x, y) in the domain 2, Eq, is classified into three different
types depending on the values of a, b, c, which may vary from point to point in
2. Lis said to be of elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic type at a point according as:
elliptic type if ac— b> 0,
parabolic type if ac~ b= 0,
and hyperbolic type if ac —B? < 0.
1.3.1 Characteristics of Second-Order Equations &
Consider a second-order partial differential equation

Introduction and Mathematical Preininaries &
equation gives two values for the slope 2 of the required curve C,
corresponding to which the higher derivatives of u ‘become indeterminate . These
directions are known as the characteristic directions, ‘Then Ei, delivers
the compatibility condition, which must be satisfied along the characteristics (see
Chapter 4, Section 4.9), For
Solving Eq. as a quadratic equation in 7A we get
‘This shows that a pair of real characteristic directions exist for b? > ac, that is,
for equations of hyperbolic type, while parabolic type equations have only one real
characteristic, and elliptic type equations have no real characteristics
| Example
Consider Laplace equation in two dimensions
Pu Pw
Here a=1=c, b=0. So, ac—b? =1>0, at all points of the domain,
Hence the Laplace equation is of elliptic type. In this equation, x and y
axe independent space directions. Since two space dimensions are involved, itis
said to be two-dimensional Laplace equation.
Laplace equation occurs abundantly in science and engineering, Steady-state
potential problems are governed by Laplace equation, 30


4 Introduction to Computational Fluid Dynamics

1.4 WELL-POSED PROBLEMS
We are often interested in finding solution of special problems for partial differential
equations which satisfy certain additional conditions, as we see in the above Q
examples. This is contrary to the usual approach for ordinary differential equations
where we first look for general solutions and then find special solutions satisfying
certain initial conditions and/or boundary conditions. Additional conditions like Q
initial and/or boundary conditions are associated with partial differential equations.
The set of initial and/or boundary conditions together with the partial differential
‘equation constitute a problem. It is important to note that these additional conditions


Introduction and Mathematical Preliminaries ”
1.4.1 Examples of Well-Posed Problems
1. Dirichlet problem for the Laplace equation is well-posed, We state the
result formally, without proof, using the notation that w € C? means that
wis continuous in the given domain and u  C/ means that w is j-times
continuously differentiable in the domain.
Poisson's Theorem: If g(x) € C? on |x| = R, then for > 2
Ra |x? ask) k
Sf 80) as, for |x| < R,
n(x) = | Roy Ln yp a for bl
408) for x|=R
belongs to C? in |x| < R, to C? in |x| < R and w(x) is a solution of the
problem
Ayu =0, —— for|xl < R,
usa), forlsl = Ry
‘where © is the solid angle in n dimensions
_ ant
“Tap
and x andy are the n-component vectors x= (x1, ¥2) 00+ .%)e Y= 34
(1 Yov--++ Je)» Ay denoting the Laplacian in » dimensions
42 Da Sana dS
att oF ag 598
‘The problem is well-posed.
2. For the heat conduction problem, the result may be stated as follows
Let g(x) € C" in Ry and | f(«)| < M exp x2), with constants M, K >
0. Then a
Vf 0-9 eeyydy, fo 7
wane zeal s0)dy, BO<FET. Gp)
a), for = 0, y
where T < zb, is a solution of the heat conduction problem
au _ &u
oN in -xo<x<o, O<r<T, (14D
a oe Q
with initial condition

8 Introduction to Compuatational Fluid Dynamics
“The problem is well-posed,


1.5 PROPERTIES OF LINEAR AND QUASILINEAR EQUATIONS
The theory of linear and quasilinear partial differential equations is a well-developed v
discipline of mathematical analysis. In this section, we state without proof some
basic qualitative properties of second order linear and quasilinear partial differential
equations. These properties are useful in our subsequent studies of CFD. For a
detailed discussion and proofs of the properties the references Courant and Hilbert Q
(1953), Hellwig (1964), Du Chateau and Zachman (1986), Prasad and Ravindran
(1985), may be consulted

1.5.1 Qualitative Properties of Partial Differential Equations
1. Lotus consider a second-order linear partial differential equation
Llu) +duy teu + fuse
where Llu] = ates + 2b ty + Cys
in a given domain Q. If Eq, be of elliptic type and the coefficients be
analytic functions of x and y in the given domain §2 then the solution must
also be analytic
Ton the other hand, the coefficients satisfy a Hilder condition (or have
derivatives of order & satisfying Hilder conditions) then the solution has
second derivatives satisfying a Hélder condition (or have derivatives up to
order k + 2 satisfying a Hilder condition), It may be noted that a function f is
said to satisfy a HOlder condition with constant % and exponent a, 0< a < 1,
it
F(P)— f(Q) = xPO”
It may be mentioned that if, for example, the coefficients are continuous but
not Hilder continuous, no twice continuously differentiable solution need
exist,
Simitar results hold for quasilinear equations
2. A basic property of a linear elliptic type partial differential equation is the
maximum-minimum principle, Wt states that, if f <0 and g > 0, a solution 36
of Eq, defined in a domain &, cannot have a positive maximum (or a
negative minimum) at an interior point unless itis a constant. A consequence
of the maximum principle is that the Dirichlet problem for an elliptic type 598
‘equation , with f < 0, has at mostone solution. The maximum principle
also holds for quasilinear equations
3. The solution of an equation of hyperbolic type with analytic coefficients
need not be analytic, Discontinuities in the higher derivatives of the solution a
‘are propagated along the characteristic curves. For quasilinear equations
of hyperbolic type, solutions with stronger discontinuity in the form of
shiocks may exist, across which the unknown function experiences a jump ¥
discontinuity.
4, For parabolic {ype equations also the maximum-minimum principle hold
Heat conduction equation and other parabolic type equations with smooth
coefficients satisfy a maximum-minimum principle. Let & be a bounded Q
region in R° (three-dimensional Euclidian space) with a smooth closed surface
S as boundary. Assuming u(x, y, 2, £) continuous in the domain @, consisting
of and its boundary and let 0 < 1 < T,, where T is some fixed value. Let,


in Q al the initial time ¢ = 0, and further m = min(m, m,). Similarly, let
M, and M, denote the corresponding maxima of and M = max(M,, My)
Then the maximum-minimum principle states that a solution u(x, y, 25) of
the 3-D heat conduction equation in the domain consisting of the Cartesian
product @ x (0,7)
uy Vu =0
satisfies the condition
ms<u<M ash
The wave equation or hyperbolic type equations do not exhibit any kind of
‘maximum-minimum principle. On the other hand, the more important qualitative
properties of hyperbolic type equations originate from the existence of real
Characteristics. These properties and discussed in the subsequent sections,
1.6 PHYSICAL CHARACTER OF SUBSONIC
AND SUPERSONIC FLOWS
As previously pointed out, the physical character of a flow field is closely related
to the type of the governing partial differential equations. At sufficiently low
speeds a fluid medium irrespective of whether it isa liquid or a gas, behaves as
an incompressible fluid, for which the density may be taken to be constant, The
continuity equation for irrotational flow then reduces to the Laplace equation, which 37
is of elliptic type. ‘This means that small pressure variations are instantaneously
propagated in all directions with infinite speed, In other words, the concept of
incompressible fluid does not take into account the fact that pressure variations
propagate in the fluid with a finite speed 598
Let us consider flows produced by small disturbances in an inviseid fluid, Since
4 small pressure change is propagated with the speed of sound, itis evident that
the effect of pressure changes produced, for example, in the air by a body moving
faster than the speed of sound cannot reach points ahead of the body. It may be said a
that the body is unable to send signals ahead, There is a fundamental difference
between subsonic and supersonic motion, We consider in the following a well
known example due to von Karman (1941) v
‘Consider the case of subsonic motion, for example, the uniform level flight of
an aieraft. In this case a pressure signal travels ahead at sound speed minus the
fight speed relative to the aircraft whereas a signal travels backward at a speed
equal (0 the sum of the flight and sound speeds. ‘Thus, although the mechanism of
signal, provided of course that the light started at a sufficiently distant point. This,
is not so in the case of a supersonic flight. To see this, let us take the simplest case Q


Introduction and Mathematical Preliminaries 

2 Introduction to Computational Fluid Dynamics
is of hyperbolic type. The characteristics separate out the disturbed region from
the undisturbed one. The region outside the Mach cone is undisturbed and all the
disturbances produced by the source are confined within the conical region, which
is the zone of disturbance. Taking the current position of the source S moving with
speed U(> c), unit time before the source was situated at the position indicated by
= and two units time before at the position —2 also shown as the point A. ‘The
disturbances produced by the source at A spread with the local speed of sound c
and remain confined within sphere of radius AB = 2c. The semi-vertical angle a
is known as the Mach angle. It may be noted that the sine of the semi-vertex angle
of the Mach cone is equal o the reciprocal of the Mach number, as may be seen

‘Thus we see that in a subsonic flow, the disturbances propagate in all directions
and theoretically can reach infinity although, in principle, the disturbances become
‘weaker as the distance from the source increases. This is typical of flow fields
governed by elliptic partial differential equations. In the case of supersonic flows,
the disturbances do not propagate in all directions but remain confined within
the Mach cone, which is the range of influence of the source. This is typical of
hyperbolic partial differential equations, For the sonic case, . Flows governed by parabolic partial differential
equations exhibit such a behaviour
When constructing finite difference representation of partial differential
equations, itis helpful to note the differences among the above three types of A
influences of a disturbance, It is desirable that the finite difference model for a
partial differential equation should reflect the type of influence corresponding to
the type of the partial differential equation.

1.7 SECOND-ORDER WAVE EQUATION
The standard linear second order partial differential equation of hyperbolic type in
two independent variables, namely, the physical space «and the time # the wave Q
equation
